>The arc of science is long but it bends to truth and understanding. - with apologies to Theodore Parker

# Cigarettes May Kill Us All

Science is a method for exposing the nature of the universe and its processes through successive approximation. Science does not lead directly to the truth, but it is as good a method as we have for discovering it. Scientists are not infalible and they are not incorruptable. Honest mistakes are forgivable, they are inherent in the process -- honest mistakes are why peer review is so important. Cultural, personal, and corporate bias are to be expected, just as scientists are beholden to try and see and avoid these sources of error. The method attempts to correct for bias by peer review and wide replication of results with diverse investigators in diverse contexts. Bias is a source of experimental error, it is embarassing when it goes unnoticed and it delays progress. When bias is hidden, or worse when it corrupts experimental design, it is no longer a source of error -- it becomes an unethical and perhaps even criminal action.

There is a long history of scientists allowing their work to be bent to the will of their employers or patrons.

In the 1970s the "scientific" claims of the tobacco industry may have fundamentally corroded our belief in the scientific process and the integrity of scientists themselves. This corrosion, and a general lack of understanding in the press (left, right, and center) and in the general public of the falible nature of the method and its corrective processes may be fueling skepticism about climate change and tolerence of those who distort the science -- at the risk of our extinction.

I was a young adult in the '70s and I can still feel the shock and revulsion that accompanied the "evidence" scientists and doctors in the sway of the tobacco industry were presenting. Their ability to "lie with science" -- bad science -- compounded by the revalations of the Pentagon Papers and Watergate, the experience of the civil rights movements of the '60s and '70s and our increasing unwillingness to hold those accountable, especially those at the top, left me deeply skeptical of our leaders and of the viability of our processes for self-correction. The current wave of climate change deniers, and the ability of people like Vice President Mike Pence to say "science doesn't matter God could change the rules at any time," reflects a wide lack of faith in science.

The earth will no doubt survive climate change. Whether or not humans and other life forms survive is very much in question. Cigarette smoking may have killed us all.
